url: https://medium.com/@knower/a-new-era-for-bancor-8c40702dfd22

Title: A NEW ERA FOR BANCOR. INTRODUCING BANCOR V3.
by knower

INTRODUCTION

A new era for Bancor
Introducing Bancor V3.


INTRODUCTION TO BANCOR AS A PROTOCOL
DeFi has gotten very hostile. Protocols are fighting for liquidity and users everywhere you look, offering new products almost every week in an attempt to gain the mindshare (and money) of the public. AMMs are in a unique position, as they capitalize off of trading fees and serve as hubs that connect the various webs and sectors of DeFi. Founded back in 2017, Bancor aims to reignite the spirit of DeFi — liquidity sourced by the people, for the people. Allow me to explain.
AMMs like Uniswap and Curve currently represent a significant portion of the TVL in DeFi, facilitating hundreds of millions of dollars in transactions everyday. While they have been successful in their own right, one of the core tenets of DeFi has been lost on both the community and developers — incentives matter. And no, not the incentives that get awarded to mercenary farmers or whales that are depositing stables, but incentives for the average user to remain in DeFi over the long term.
Bancor is the only DEX currently on the market that offers Safe Staking and soon-to-be 100% impermanent loss protection to their LPs, no matter the duration they’ve invested. But what is Safe Staking, and how does this benefit traders and long term investors and prove profitable for Bancor?
Bancor introduced the concept of Safe Staking after seeing the havoc that impermanent loss can cause for traders. While many might view the process of liquidity providing to be more passive and better suited for those investing on a longer time frame, the opposite is true due to impermanent loss. In an article by The Defiant, it was found that ~52% of LP addresses on Uniswap were actually not in profit. It was also found that impermanent losses dwarfed trading fees earned by users by around $60 million. The Defiant stated that pairs of highly correlated assets are more likely to be profitable, yet still subject to the inevitable clutches of impermanent loss. Not a good look for a protocol that touted concentrated liquidity as a groundbreaking innovation in DeFi.
Impermanent loss is actually a bit of a falsehood in itself. The only reason it can be called “impermanent” is due to the fact the losses from LPing can’t be realized until a position is sold. Well, of course this is the case. Any investment’s gains or losses aren’t realized until someone sells, regardless of what strategy they’re using. This is of course no different in DeFi, yet due to the complexities that can come from various LP strategies, a different label was needed to obscure what’s really going on behind the scenes.
To combat this problem, Bancor has been able to come up with quite the solution for its LPs, a first mover advantage in a DeFi world overcome by fees and impermanent loss. By breaking down the barriers and taking on the costs incurred for its LPs, Bancor is opening the doors to real, sustainable yields for all. Whether you’re a DAO looking to offload some of your treasury in a safe haven or someone looking to take a break from constant trading, Bancor is there for you.
Safe Staking basically works by utilizing protocol-owned liquidity (in this case BNT) to match user deposits 1:1. If someone wanted to LP and deposited around $25,000 ETH, Bancor would match that with $25,000 BNT. In this scenario, both the user and the protocol earn LP tokens, giving both their yield. If a user has experienced impermanent loss, the LP tokens earned by Bancor are then given to a user as compensation. This process not only benefits those who wish to LP safely — attracting more users over the long term — but helps the protocol earn additional return on top of trading fees they might accumulate. The Bancor DAO is able to evaluate the strategies employed by the protocol, choosing to increase or shrink the number of BNT offered to different pools.
Is there still volatility in providing liquidity even with the addition of Safe Staking? Absolutely, but the absence of impermanent loss certainly makes Bancor a more attractive option for those looking to dive into the world of DeFi. Already, liquidity is flowing in — see for yourself.
Are you really going to fade the LINK marines, anon?
The farmers are coming.
Sure, you could always hop over to Curve and deposit stables to earn a safe yield — but the majority of individuals in crypto aren’t looking to hold stables. This is a volatile market, and one that consistently rewards those who think out of the box. Deploying capital to higher beta assets is a better strategy for most speculators than earning a 5–10% yield on a USDC/USDT pair. People want to make it, and stable coins (fortunately) don’t go up like BTC or ETH does. Bancor V3 fixes this.

LOOKING AT BANCOR V3
Bancor V3 is ready to shake up DeFi and bring the power back to investors. With the coming of this innovative and much anticipated upgrade, Bancor is offering a host of new features. Whether it be their infinity pools or auto-compounding rewards, Bancor V3 has its users’ best interests at heart.
We all know how frustrating it can be to transact on Ethereum — gas fees are a pain, everyone can agree on that. Instead of having to pay fees every time you wish to add rewards to an LP position, Bancor V3 is offering the ability to instantly add these to a pool — no more manual actions required on your end.
Oh, and the part about infinity pools? Prior to the dawn of Bancor V3, users had to wait until there was more space in a pool to deposit — this is coming to an end. Feel free to deposit as much as you want, whenever you want, thanks to Superfluid Liquidity. More on this later. In addition to these new features, there are also plans to go multi-chain and provide support on L2s, further breaking down the restrictions that main-net gas fees can put on a user.

FINAL THOUGHTS ON THE FUTURE
So far, protocols like yearn DAO, Keeper DAO, UMA Protocol and many more have begun depositing portions of their treasury to Bancor. It’s clear to most in the space that running a treasury is difficult, so why over complicate it? Recently, we have all seen drama unfold surrounding protocols like Olympus DAO and Wonderland, particularly due to their unsustainable APRs and their stagnant treasuries. It’s in a protocol’s best interests to keep innovating and focus on the future, so offloading a portion of a treasury to earn stable yield just makes sense. It is our belief that this will be a trend as DAOs continue to enter the crypto space.
The real flippening.
Bancor V3 aims to transition the protocol to more of a safe-haven for all. While there is still some catching up to do in terms of TVL and market share, Bancor has the chance to increase their stake in DeFi and reclaim their throne. When Sushiswap forked Uniswap, it was a community ordeal. DeFi as a whole has lost its roots and hasn’t made enough efforts to protect its most valuable asset — users. Bancor is trying to fix the mess that has been created over the past year, one innovation at a time. Stay tuned for updates, as Bancor plans to release V3 in (you guessed it) three stages — dawn, sunrise and daylight.
Dawn is coming, anon.