url: https://medium.com/@meritcircle/entering-a-new-era-for-merit-circle-3a505b5eb5ca

Title: ENTERING A NEW ERA FOR MERIT CIRCLE
by Merit Circle

INTRODUCTION

Entering a new era for Merit Circle

Since the emergence of the Merit Circle DAO, there has been a continued emphasis on diversification. Initially, we focused on creating a solid portfolio of the strongest play-to-earn games and infrastructure partners. We quickly realized however that the ambitions and ideas of the DAO are vastly different from those considered gaming guilds, and therefore we felt that a new era for Merit Circle commenced.
In this article, we would like to guide you through these changes and show you what Merit Circle aims to move towards.

SUSTAINABILITY & RESILIENCE
The Merit Circle DAO emerged from a scholarship organization established amidst the rise of Axie Infinity. Back then, this was an extremely lucrative opportunity paving the way for dozens of so-called ‘gaming guilds’. In early September 2021 the Merit Circle DAO was created and since then we have onboarded a robust and diverse portfolio of play-to-earn games and further expanded our scholarship operations.
As the Merit Circle DAO grew to host thousands of gamers across various games, inefficiencies appeared in some current in-game economies. In some instances players would find that they were earning above minimum wage in their respective countries and suddenly their incomes were reduced due to decreasing token price. With incentives reducing, play to earn games that initially were lucrative and welcoming suddenly weren’t as appealing as before.
This change in dynamics also caused a shift in the current set-up of these gaming guilds. Organizations dependent on the daily activity of gamers across various games are quickly cut off from operational capital with the slightest turn of markets. This structure is not built to last and only thrives in optimal conditions.
Whilst continuing to support our initial goals (i.e. creating maximum value within the play-to-earn industry), we are excited to share our new vision for the Merit Circle DAO.
Picking up the tools
We want everyone to have a high-level understanding of how our visions re-positions the DAO and with this in mind we want the DAO to become much more than just a gaming guild. We want to become a gaming DAO.
From its inception the Merit Circle DAO has sought to be more involved than just investing and recruiting gamers; it wanted to contribute on a number of different levels and verticals. Following the successful launch of the introductory phase we have identified several areas where we could improve the existing operations and further develop our offering.
In order to future proof the DAO, we believe that the Merit Circle DAO should house a variety of revenue streams and a vertical range of products that, in their own individual way, collectively generate a positive return for the DAO. We have already shared the news that we are developing our own gaming platform which will seek to optimize our existing gaming practices but there are so many more opportunities that can benefit the Merit Circle DAO.
That said, we are excited to share the new strategic positioning we have been working on internally. We started the year with three pillars, we continue with four verticals.


VALUE ACCRUAL ALL AROUND
There are many aspects that allow for an organization like Merit Circle to realize a positive return within the play-to-earn industry. The first two verticals are more commonly known and have been preached profoundly by Merit Circle: investing and gaming.
Throughout our brief existence, Merit Circle has invested in more than 30 projects so far, realizing millions in profits and countless other, as yet unrealized, gains. Each day, new projects arise that might be the next big thing in the industry, and we are excited to share these developments each month in our treasury reports.
The play-to-earn industry would not exist without gaming, and neither would Merit Circle. We’re all gamers and we simply love gaming. Web3 had made gaming not only entertaining, but simultaneously rewarding. Over the past couple of months we have scaled to more than 3,000 gamers playing multiple games across the globe.
While this number might sound impressive, it’s a metric that we don’t put too much emphasis on. Rather, we have focused on building a solid foundation and scaling in games with a sustainable economy. Where others boasted about the scholarship numbers, we transformed that term into a more suiting ‘gamers’. In time, the play-to-earn industry won’t only have games that are rewarding; instead, plenty of games will be both rewarding and enjoyable.
The Merit Circle DAO is still actively helping those across the globe securing better means of financing their needs and wants, but we are tailoring our infrastructure more towards gamers in general as opposed to solely focusing on those requesting a scholarship. Excitingly, this year dozens of games will release a playable version allowing us to onboard even more gamers.
Now, the two verticals we are integrating, for the first time, should not be underestimated as they will most likely play an important role in the future of the Merit Circle DAO and its partners.
Guiding the very first steps
Investing and advising are one thing, but creating something out of nothing is something completely different. The only way to truly understand what it takes to create a game, is to get your hands dirty and dive in headfirst. The Merit Circle DAO has taken this approach from the very beginning, and recently made it a reality through the creation of our first creative project, Edenhorde.
However, Edenhorde is only a taste of what we have in store. We have partnered with gaming industry veterans to create a development and incubation arm, to be known as Merit Circle Studios, that will house upcoming games and creative projects from their initial phases. Each and every project will independently create value but also combine to add value to the Merit Circle DAO.
If you’re wondering whether this means that the Merit Circle DAO would turn into a game development studio, you’re only partially right. The Merit Circle DAO has gained tremendous amounts of knowledge on topics such as game development, in-game economics, marketing, organizational efforts and governance. Additionally, the DAO will (and has) received value in the form of advisory tokens in various projects, recognition that the Merit Circle brand is a reputable and trusted party within the industry.
Being a key player in the industry, Merit Circle DAO has an obligation to the entire industry to contribute on a much larger scale. We are building this industry together and want to do this as efficiently as possible. Imagine combining our network, expertise, infrastructure and brand name with an enticing game — doesn’t that sound like a formula for success? We believe so.
Merit Circle Studios will not be a development studio. We can be seen as a game publisher that gets involved from the very first stages of development. In collaboration with the game developers, we will seek to craft exhilarating experiences that are both fun and rewarding. As and when we have our own ideas, such as Edenhorde, we also have the required skills to make them a reality.
A more elaborate explanation of this vertical will be presented in the near future along with additional information on a brand new game we are involved with. Of course, the governance of these activities is clearly displayed in MIP-10, accepted by the DAO. This proposal laid the foundation for future structures in which we distribute the created value among all involved parties and DAO contributors.
So far, everything might sound familiar to those who closely following the Merit Circle DAO, but there’s one thing we have not mentioned before: a vertical that ties all the above together.
Filling the gap
The current NFT space is a dominant part of the play-to-earn industry, despite having some clear flaws. The dominance of ‘one player’ and the problems that come along with that screams out for a better solution. Art, gaming, infrastructure and all other sorts of NFTs are all treated in a similar fashion while they all require a delicate and separate approach.
We have learnt that the currently dominant platform, OpenSea, is not built to service the type of projects that Merit Circle interacts with on a daily basis.
We’re more than aware that the NFT marketplace industry is competitive with new players popping up everyday, even within the gaming niche. Announcements have been made of marketplaces specifically for in-game assets, but they do lack one important factor. You could build the most exquisite marketplace, but you’re nowhere without the actual content.
Throughout the emergence of the Merit Circle DAO we have partnered with more than 30 projects who we have been closely supporting as investors and advisors. Imagine bringing our investments, gaming operations and our development all together in one product that raises the bar of the entire industry?
There’s a clear gap in the market right now between NFT marketplaces that are either heavily flawed or too fragmented. With Merit Circle’s strong focus on gaming, we believe we can fill that gap. That’s why we have picked up the shovels and started development for this pillar in full force. We are seeking to solve the pain points not only for collectors but creators too.
We will build a sustainable model around this NFT marketplace suited to the ethos and mind-set of the Web3 space, something that’s currently lacking. Naturally, this vertical will be widely covered in upcoming articles and proposals answering any questions.

CLOSING THE CIRCLE

Understanding our position and extracting value from it brings us the ability to tie all of our verticals together. The above image is the new roadmap for the Merit Circle DAO. Independent branches all create value and add value to its core.
As you can see, there are four verticals; Investments, Development &amp; Incubation, Gaming and Trading. All four translate into separate branches represented by their respective products. Moreover, we have considered goals of each vertical, what strategies they will utilize, how they will create value for the Merit Circle DAO and, thereby, the $MC token.
Bear in mind that the strongest element of this whole ecosystem is the cooperation and merger of the separate verticals. The success of one vertical will contribute to the success of another, and vice versa.
Of course, there are dozens of investors in the industry with new funds popping up daily. You have new guilds with the hopes of amassing thousands of gamers; dozens of talented and experienced gaming studios building great games; and others building marketplaces for in-game assets. But is anyone combining all of this in one single DAO? We are convinced that this is a formula for success; no one else is covering such a wide space within the industry.
We’ve generated significant revenue from our investments that have earned us the opportunity to bootstrap into new ventures. The opportunities truly are endless.

ANSWERING THE UNKNOWN
We are aware that this visual might raise some questions and a lot is still unknown. Understand that we are passionately working to realize this dream and we will gradually reveal how we aim to tackle the above, including the formation of development teams, agreements with external partners and the collaboration with our community. Naturally, being a DAO, each product will require its own proposal to involve the community in its development.
We are looking forward to the future of Merit Circle and simply can’t wait to deliver the products we have envisioned. Expect an article describing our current activities and the way the value flows back towards our token holders for each vertical in the near future.