url: https://medium.com/1kxnetwork/virtual-beings-51606c041acf

Title: VIRTUAL BEINGS: A NEW INTERNET-NATIVE MEDIUM FOR SHARED STORYTELLING
by Justin McAfee

INTRODUCTION

Virtual Beings: A New Internet-Native Medium for Shared Storytelling

The increasingly virtual nature of our shared social experience will exponentiate the population of virtual beings over the next few decades.
In short, virtual beings are entities or characters that exist entirely in the digital domain, crossing over to our world via social media interaction, shared mediums like games and Internet-native spaces, and hologram technology. They range in scope from human-controlled avatars manipulated with motion capture technology to fully-sentient anthropomorphic AI.
Virtual beings exist at the intersection of multiple technological trends (e.g. VR/AR, artificial intelligence, high-fidelity CGI, gaming, social media) and human social psychology (e.g. parasocial relationships, desire for companionship, cultural animism, anthropomorphic design).
Web3 has the potential to further accelerate the emergence of these digital consciousnesses through new creator revenue models, Internet-native organizational structures, and crypto-enabled digital ownership.
In this article, I will:
Define and briefly discuss the history and characteristics of different types of virtual beingsReview some of the existing technological stack used in their creationIdentify areas in which crypto-economics and web3 technologies can improve upon the creation, management, and distribution of virtual beingsHighlight existing projects working in this domainSpeculate on the future of web3 social experiences in the age of artificial intelligence and synthetic media (AI-generated media, generative media, personalized media)
By reviewing multiple aspects of virtual beings, this piece hopes to elucidate the concept as a trend here to stay that can significantly benefit from the use of the web3 technology stack.

TYPES OF VIRTUAL BEINGS
Virtual beings (VBs) come in many forms and vary in complexity.
VTubers
VTubers are virtual beings who stream their life on popular video platforms. VTubers are humans using a spectrum of consumer-ready motion capture technologies and character creation softwares, commonly in the anime aesthetic and streamed on Twitch or YouTube. — virtualhumans.org
VTubers originated in Japan in the mid-2010s and grew into an international phenomenon by the early 2020s. Using real-time motion capture technology to manipulate a virtual avatar, VTubers stream and post videos across a range of platforms, including YouTube, Twitch, Niconico, and Bilibili, to a fanbase enthralled by the characters they’ve created.
Early iterations of the VTuber go as far back as February 2010 when visual novel maker Nitroplus began uploading content to their YouTube channel featuring their mascot Super Sonico talking about their upcoming releases. The phenomenon reached a tipping point, however, in late 2016 after Kizuna AI made her debut on YouTube:
【自己紹介】はじめまして！キズナアイですლ(´ڡ`ლ)
Kizuna AI first coined ‘virtual YouTuber’, shortened to VTuber, to describe herself. Drawing on her ability to create an intimate experience for her fans by responding to their questions and comments, she was able to grow her fanbase to two million subscribers within ten months.
Following the success of Kizuna AI, the VTuber trend exploded in popularity in Japan, and later expanded internationally via the appeal of anime and manga fandom. The dramatic increase in Twitch viewership during the 2020 COVID-19 pandemic further heightened familiarity with the concept outside of Japan, leading to the creation of a VTuber tag on Twitch and for YouTube to note it as a dominant trend in its 2020 Culture and Trends report, emphasizing its growth to 1.5 billion views per month by October of that year.
Image of Gawr Gura
VTubers rely on an ability to tap into the power of fan interaction, parasocial relationships, pseudonymity, and storytelling, creating vibrant characters that tend to be more interesting than their human streamer counterparts.
Today, there are more than 16,000 VTubers (up from just 1,000 in March of 2018) with millions of fans across social media platforms. Popular VTubers include Gawr Gura, Inugami Korone, Nyanners, Ironmouse, Kiryu Coco, Code Miko, and Ai Angelica, to name a few.
Within web3, NFTs have similarly been noted for creating rabid fanbases, community interaction, and a sense of belonging, so they are well-suited to capture VTuber mindshare. Some VTubers have begun to experiment with the technology, with Kizuna AI being the primary example after announcing a hiatus beginning in February 2022 to take time to further explore NFTs.
The most obvious use case for VTuber NFTs is the creation of token-gated content and Discords, along with digital collectibles. But two other possibilities stand out: rights management and avatar markets. Fully rigged character models could be created by third-parties and distributed in the form of NFTs. This is an upgrade to the current marketplace and commissioning system in place since creators could better track the use of their models while receiving secondary sale revenue flows. Anata is one such project experimenting with this, launching 1,000 male and 1,000 female Live2D VTuber avatar NFTs that are fully functional in streaming apps.
Virtual Influencers
A virtual influencer is a digital character created in computer graphics software, then given a personality defined by a first-person view of the world, and made accessible on media platforms for the sake of influence. — virtualhumans.org
Virtual Influencer Imma
Virtual influencers are not dissimilar to their traditional counterparts. Their lifestyles are depicted on social media, they interact with their fans across many mediums, and are often used by brands as spokespeople for their products. However, unlike your average celebrity, virtual influencers are CGI-generated personas that can be anyone, do anything, and go anywhere in the digital world. They are not limited by physical constraints, so can be in two places at once, never tire, and never go off-script.
One of the most well-known virtual influencers is Lil Miquela, a 19-year old self-proclaimed robot pop star living in Los Angeles. She has modeled for Prada, starred in Calvin Klein ads, gave interviews at Coachella, and topped Spotify charts. In 2020, Lil Miquela made approximately $12M for her parent studio, Brud.
Virtual influencers like Lil Miquela have almost three times the engagement rate of their IRL counterparts, and brands love them for the control they enable over their identity. There are plenty examples of celebrity sponsors making costly mistakes for brands, something that could never happen with a virtual influencer whose entire life is scripted.
Image from HypeAuditor
In addition to control, virtual influencers offer brands the ability to tell stories across a myriad of platforms and formats in a way not possible by their human counterparts in what is known as transmedia storytelling. This form of storytelling uses multiple media to provide different access points to a story or character. To get a sense of this power, consider the Travis Scott concert in Fortnite. In order to perform in-game, an avatar had to be created for Travis Scott which breaks the illusion — you know that it isn’t actually him but instead him playing as an avatar in-game. A virtual influencer, alternatively, looks the same across all platforms, which creates a narrative spell not possible by the flesh-to-digital transcription of real life celebrities.
The most prominent way brands have interacted with virtual influencers to date is in the realm of fashion. Virtual influencers are oftentimes decked out in the latest wear as they pose across social media. Their scripted lives allow them to craft a specific lifestyle element and personality for their brands. Lil Miquela attended the Prada FW18/19 show in Milan, Shudu Gram became the digital face of Balmain’s models, and Noonoouri graced Dior ads as part of their “Rouge” campaign that originally starred Natalie Portman. Major fashion houses such as Balenciaga, Alexander McQueen, Valentino, H&amp;M, Nike, Salvatore Ferragamo, and more have all embraced virtual influencers to showcase their items. Some, such as Prada, have even doubled-down on the idea to create their own in-house characters.
Image by Miquela Sousa
Music has also been a prominent area for virtual influencers:
Yameii Online’s track “Baby My Phone” inspired multiple Tik-Tok trends and mash-ups reaching millions of views across hundreds of thousands of videosKai, a 16-year old virtual influencer within Roblox known for creating the game Splash (who recently raised over $20M from investors) performed to over 100,000 fans in 7 different Roblox venues simultaneously for over 48 hoursVirtual K-Pop girl group K/DA created by Riot Games to promote new game characters ended up raking in 508M views on Youtube with a viral music video and song ‘Pop/Stars’FN Meka raps on social media while showcasing ultra rare items like Starbucks-branded PS5s and AR sneakers
Virtual influencer culture has recently begun merging with web3: Dapper Labs acquired Brud — the studio behind Lil Miquela, multiple virtual influencers have launched NFTs including Lil Miquela, LV4, Rae, Shudu, FNMeka, and Yameii, and major web3 studios such as RTFKT have collaborated with virtual influencers to promote their NFTs. It is especially exciting to think about the future of web3 and virtual influencers, such as rental contracts to use in events or ads and fractionalization of the influencer to form DAOs around them that curate their stories and receive revenue flows to a community-owned treasury.
Distributed Personas
A distributed persona is a digital character that is managed by an open and permissionless community. Fans create content such as music, animations, videos, lore, and more using the character. Distributed personas may be autonomous in some form such as AI artists but are ultimately moderated by the community.
Separate from virtual influencers although similar in nature is the category of distributed personas. These are characters who are broadly managed by an open and permissionless community, as opposed to virtual influencers which have one authority or studio managing them.
One of the best examples of this today is Hatsune Miku, a Japanese Vocaloid software voicebank released by Crypton Future Media in 2007. Vocaloid software allows users to synthesize the sound of singing by typing lyrics and inputting a melody. Because each vocaloid has its own characteristics and are effectively separate ‘singers’, they are typically released with moe anthropomorphic characters, the most successful of which is Hatsune Miku herself.
Image from Crypton Future Media
Hatsune Miku was originally released under a “remix-free” license. Since her debut, she has starred in hundreds of thousands of songs and music videos made by creators and fans from all over the world. A freeware program, MikuMikuDance, spawned a boom in user-generated animations which were even included in live holographic performances attended by fans around the world. The distributed nature of Hatsune Miku and the remixing culture at her core prompted Crypton to adopt a non-commercial with attribution creative commons license for the character.
Hatsune Miku is a highly successful distributed software that has a decentralized community of creators making new songs and animations for the virtual being, earning over $120M in total revenue through music, merchandise, hologram concerts, and shareable media in the first five years alone. This model lends itself well to DAOs — human creators release new music and dances, vote on content canon, and collect revenues to a community-owned treasury. Some distributed personas have begun experimenting with this idea.
For example, Botto is a decentralized autonomous AI artist controlled by holders of $BOTTO, the native governance token. Token holders stake $BOTTO to earn non-transferable Voting Power (VP), which is used to vote on 350 AI-generated art works each week. At the end of each period, the piece with the most votes is auctioned on SuperRare as an NFT with proceeds used to buyback and burn $BOTTO tokens. To date, Botto is one of the highest grossing artists of all time on the marketplace with over $2M in total sales.
Since creative AIs have the ability to infinitely create new works, human curation will play an important role in the new economy. DAOs that manage the curation, distribution, promotion, and governance of distributed personas while benefiting from value creation will likely spawn a new age of AI-enabled and/or human-generated digital character productions.
Autonomous Entities
The simulation of human intelligence in machines that are programmed to think like humans and mimic their actions. The term may also be applied to any machine that exhibits traits associated with a human mind such as learning and problem-solving. — virtualhumans.org
The first three types of virtual beings were broadly human-controlled in one fashion or another. Our final type, however, is not. Autonomous entities use artificial intelligence and other tools to simulate life. They can run the gamut from chatbots and virtual world non-playable characters to AI companions and digital reincarnations of the deceased.
AI Companionship
One of the simplest forms of autonomous entities are AI companions. The rise in trust and embrace of AI among younger generations seems to entail a future where humans form close bonds with AI entities. Entire business models have formed around this idea, with companies like Replika providing friendly chatbots that interact with their humans throughout the day and Hybri providing custom 3D model bots to simulate romantic partnership. The growth of the AI companion market is evident already: Xiaoice, an AI companion spinoff from Microsoft, was recently valued at $1b, and the conversational AI market is expected to grow to $13.9b by 2024 on the back of the Loneliness Pandemic — a noted uptick in loneliness experienced by 61% of polled adults.
Source: KPMG
One project in web3 focused on AI companions is Petaverse Network, which draws on a long tradition of virtual pets, from Tamagotchi to Nintendogs. Petaverse Network seeks to create an interoperable digital standard for virtual pets, hashing their personality on-chain so that it exists forever. This personality represents a data layer for the pet that updates over time as you interact with it across games, AR, and VR. Other projects will be able to build on this data layer, reinterpreting the pet for their own virtual worlds and games.
Digital Reincarnation
Extending AI companionship further, an AI could be trained on the digital footprints of an individual to replicate their behaviors after they die in what is known as digital reincarnation. With enough text messages, social media posts, and videos used as training data, a neural network could learn to simulate the speech and mannerisms of the deceased while presenting themselves in a photorealistic CGI model of their likeness or as a chatbot. In fact, it was recently reported that Joshua Barbeau used a software to create a hyper-realistic chatbot backed by GPT-3 to recreate the experience of talking with his deceased fiance by training it on her text messages. Because of the sensitive nature of digital reincarnation, rights management will be crucial, and encrypted NFTs that require staking to access might be the best solution to ensure these digital replicas are not used elsewhere on the Internet.
Image from San Francisco Chronicle
Autonomous Entities
Autonomous entities are not limited to companionship or digital reincarnation though. They could also be virtual world agents. A glaring issue with many virtual worlds today is the emptiness felt when exploring. Populating virtual worlds with highly intelligent NPCs is one method of giving life to these environments. Imagine:
Decentral Games’ virtual casinos stocked with highly sophisticated chatbotsCryptovoxels stores inhabited with AI NPCs selling digital goods 24/7Anthropomorphised trading bots with distinct personalitiesOn-chain creatures that live and adapt to external variables using oracle data feedsGame characters that morally evolve over time based on the actions of a user across multiple games
The possibilities of virtual beings with artificial intelligence in digital domains borders on the endless.